>> Taylor: Hello and welcome
to the Haskell weekly podcast. I'm your host,
Taylor Fausak. I'm the lead engineer at
ITProTV. And with me today is one of the
engineers on my team and my co host, Cameron
Gera. Thanks for joining me, Cam.
>> Cameron: Hey, thanks for having me. Glad to be here.
>> Always good to have you. So what are we talking about
today, Cam?
>> Well, you know, as an
organization that uses Haskell in production every day,
I figured we should take the chance to
review this post by Christian at
Foxhound Systems, where he talks about why
Haskell is their first choice for building production
software systems and coincides a lot with what we do here
at ITProTV. So, you know, really going to talk about our
experience today and how it relates to some of the
really great things that Haskell provides us.
>> Yeah. We were joking earlier today that
we could have written this blog post like every point we
like. Yep. Yep. We've seen that, too. Same stuff.
>> We like that. Yep. That's great too. Learning
curve, kind of tough, but we still love it.
>> Mhm. Yeah, and I guess we can jump
right in. So he broke this down into, like, nine
big points about why he prefers Haskell
and we'll dig in each one of them a little bit.
The first one is maybe the least surprising,
which is the strong, static type system. I think
everybody talks about this when it comes to
Haskell, but it's worth remarking like, Yeah, it is
good. It does help prevent errors and reduce
cognitive load.
>> So you're telling me Haskell isn't the new
JavaScript? It's not the wild, Wild West anymore?
>> Well, JavaScript has TypeScript these days,
but it's better... The type system in Haskell
is better than the one in TypeScript, I think.
>> For sure. Hands down, hands down. Yeah. No, I
think it was... You know, after the
learning curve, which I feel like a lot of people have as a con
of learning, you know, doing Haskell in production.
The cognitive load really does get reduced because
you're not thinking about Yeah. Is this
gonna work? Is, um I'm gonna get a runtime error here. You're going to
see it 95% of the time
in the compiler. The compiler's gonna say, Hey yeah, That's not
the That's not the right thing to do here. You're gonna get
some type mismatch.
>> Yeah, and the most basic example is like, Is something
null or is it optional or whatever? And this is
where, when you compare the languages like Java, you
get a huge benefit by using Haskell,
because in Java anything could be null. But in
Haskell, only stuff that is marked as maybe can be null.
>> Yeah, there's no if this equal
null, do this, it's There's no having to check that, which
is, super helpful.
>> Yeah, it's amazing to me. So, like in
my history, I've did a lot of Ruby reprogramming
earlier in my career and, ah,
huge portion of the
runtime errors that we fixed were
nil, which is Ruby's null
doesn't you know, have the method whatever we wanted to call it
like name or something like that, and it would take
forever to track these things down because normally the null came
into your system, and then it gets passed around by like,
15 different functions, and finally, something tries to call something on, and it's
totally disconnected from where it came from. We just
don't have those problems in Haskell. We never run into that
stuff.
>> Yeah, in the legacy
JavaScript API, Yeah, we definitely had that experience as well. it
would be like, Yeah, push this to production And we wrote
test cases and we can write the test case in case
somebody can put anything in. And there you go, run time exception
that's, you know, kind of difficult and
dispersed when you're trying to, figure out what's going
on. Another great, um, you know,
thing that reduced cognitive load the fact that types kind of
act as a documentation source like I mean,
obviously there's implementations where
you can use Swagger's documentation to
operate auto, generate API documentation and
such. But I don't think he's really talking about that
here. He's more just talking about you can read
a type and he said, Oh, the
type person, Yeah, that's
going to be dealing with a person may be Have the
name of that age, all these different things and,
you know, you read the type. You know what it is or what
Well, it will probably do within the system,
>> and there are exceptions to this. So if you have a function that has type
like I take three strings and I give you back a
string. Good luck figuring out what it actually does. You'll need to read the
documentation, but
>> that's why you have types type around those kind of
things.
>> Exactly. And, a lot of functions have more specific
types in that. So it's still useful. And
another place that this is really useful is
searching. And, like almost getting to the
point of program synthesis, having the program write itself where you're
like, I don't know what goes here. So I'll put an underscore
and have GHC tell me the things that can go in
there where all the types will line up. Or you can do these searches on
Hoogle or Stackage or wherever. Um, but
it's really powerful to say like, I know we have a
function that does this. I can't remember what it's called right now.
Compiler: Just tell me what to put in here,
>> right? Yeah. No, that those aren't
exactly typed holes, right? Those were just holes in general.
>> No that's typed holes.
>> Yeah, well, typed holes are a
godsend. You obviously you have to have a
problem. You know the package in that
module if you're expecting it to give you something. But
overall, it's been
hands down a great tool for you
know, us. As we're working through
just day to day actions,
>> Yeah and for me, it's been a game changer
coming from again my previous experience with dynamic
languages because
you mentioned you have to have the module in scope, But often you do
already because you're dealing with its data types. So you're just like,
uh, let's see if there's a conversion functional there is. All right, Cool. I'll use
it. Yeah,
Speaking of moving on with our life, should we go to the next point?
>> I mean, I think so, Yeah. Hey, talks about
how Haskell enables writing code that is composable
testable and has predictable side effects.
>> Yeah, and this dovetails nicely with what we were just
talking about. So as a extension of
the powerful type system and the reduced cognitive
load, all side effects are
typically marked as IO
or You know, however you manage effects will just say IO throughout
here, but it it makes it really easy to reason about
stuff, because when you look at a function. You don't have to wonder.
Is this reading some environment variable? Or is
it writing some file or doing something that can change?
Um, no, it's just depending exactly on the types that are passed
in, right?
>> Yeah. And I think that, you know, helps with
your composability, testability as well. You can kind
of, you know, construct what you expect the data look
like. Pass it through some functions and,
you know, test the result like it's not hard to do in
Haskell because it's not always a ton of boilerplate
you have to set up like if you have your type, you construct it
and passed to a function and see what
happens right like that, because it's kind of there,
um, which I think is a really great benefit.
>> Yeah, And in addition to the testing side of
this, uh, the purity of the
predictable side effects makes it easy to do
equation reasoning, which is kind of a consequence
of, or a different way of stating referential
transparency, where if you have some
definition, wherever you use that term, you
can replace it with its definition and keep doing that
until you can kind of see how things were gonna work.
So, uh, typically, you will see
examples on blog post of people doing that with, like, a
fold where they have the foldr expression,
and then they'll, like, go one step and go another step and keep
doing that until it's all reduced down to one term. Um,
but you could do that to a smaller scale with
various functions throughout your code base just to see how they work.
It's pretty powerful.
>> Yeah, for sure. Um, keep on
trucking here. He kind of
points at how Haskell facilitates. rapid
development, worry free refactoring and
excellent maintainability. I think here it
ITProTV were in love with the maintainability
we have with our Haskell repo.
>> We would say that it's egg-cellent.
>> We make an internal joke here
that we're all eggs. So it's a very good pun
there, Taylor.
>> Yeah, we had a typo three years ago, and it's just puns
nonstop since then. Forever and ever.
Anyway, Yeah, I think that the maintainability of
Haskell is one of its biggest selling points. And in
fact, after the uh, Haskell survey
last year, I wrote a blog post saying that,
uh, Haskell killer application
is maintainability because, um,
it's painless to change
stuff. And that makes it really easy to keep iterating
on development. And just, like, improving
stuff without breaking stuff all the time,
right?
>> Yeah. I want to point back to the rapid
development. You know, there's
he references ghcid which here
at ITProTV We use every single day
as something that allows us to be quick
When were, you know, writing day to day code, you know,
plugging those type holes and we talked about and seeing
What? What should we plug in there or, you know
Oh, this is a compiler. Let's keep moving. So, you know,
there's a lot of I mean, I think
ghcid right now is for me the
top tool we have in our Haskell tool belt,
uh, for rapid development.
>> Yeah, and to give a sense of how rapid it
is, I don't have the exact numbers, but I think
our code bases like under
100,000 lines. But roughly around there
and with ghcid.
We can build it and build it and run our test
suite in, like, under five or 10 seconds,
depending on what exactly you change. But
yeah, like if you want quick feedback on a typed hole, you could
get that within seconds, which is fantastic.
>> Yeah. You know, another benefit of
the type system in general allows us to have a lot of worry
free refactoring. Obviously, there's chances that you
can create some change in a
JSON Key or something along those lines which could create
run time errors that you don't catch by the compiler. But
95% of the time, if you're using generics
and stuff like that, you're gonna be able to keep
that pretty maintains as well as having some unit
tests and property tests to make sure to go alongside of that too.
Just really ensure that you have a very maintained
piece of code and refactoring it. Yeah,
gets to be a little easier. A little less stressful.
>> Makes code review a lot nicer to because you don't have to
wonder. Does this all still type? Check because you know it
does. Because the build does it for you.
>> Like green check Mark. Good to exactly
Yeah, Awesome. Let's keep going.
>> Yeah, so the next one is talking about performance.
Uh, Haskell programs have stellar performance,
uh, leading to faster applications and lower hardware
costs. So we've seen this to be true. It's been
kind of surprising to me that we're running
ah, lot of our infrastructure on pretty much the
smallest Amazon instances that we can.
And it just works like we haven't really done
anything special. No profiling, no, like optimized
builds or anything like that. I mean, they're optimized, but not
especially optimized. Um, and it
just works. Um, and again
drawing on my history, I used to work with Ruby applications and we would
have maybe scores of them
running. And you've got, like, a reverse proxy in front of all of
them, and they run out of memory all the time, and then you have to
kill them and restart them, and we just don't have to deal with any of
that.
>> Yeah, no, I think for me this
point was kind of like the Oh, wow. Dang, that's
cool. Because he did a great comparison with, you know, scripting
language like PHP versus You
know the Haskell equivalent, right? They
run the same code there. Same in point. Same
database usage, Same payload
on and are saying load
of users. And you know,
he you know, the cost is
like 1/16 of what? The PHP,
uh, you know, runs. And he's running
four services rather than four
instances of the service rather than the two that he was for PHP. So,
like that to me was like, Whoa, like, 16
times smaller.
>> Yeah. I think you got the numbers backwards there. So
they were running four copies of the PHP
server because they needed the additional infrastructure.
And I think they're running two of the Haskell one.
Oh, no. Did I? Oh, I got that backwards. Sorry. I'm bad at reading
tables. You were right. So, yeah,
they're running smaller services and more
of them.
>> Yeah. And the, you know, the larger
PHP instances had,
you know, four dedicated CPU cores.
>> Yeah.
>> Where...
>> And they had, like, 16 times as much. RAM
right?
>> Yeah, like half gig RAM on that.
Yeah. Since it's just bonkers that you know,
they're and they're also outperforming the
PHP instances like by, you
know, you know, milliseconds, but still yeah,
its's still pretty substantial when you're dealing with
hundreds of thousands of requests per minute. Like
that's important.
>> Yeah, he says. Haskell outperforms PHP by
at least an order of magnitude. So I
think, yeah, that. I mean, we don't have a
like-for-like comparison to make their
from our experience. Like you've mentioned earlier.
We do have a legacy JavaScript, API that we are migrating
away from, but we haven't
done any like, Okay, let's move this in
point from here to there and measure the
performance along the way.
But, like I mentioned all of our services are
running on tiny AWS machines and it's working great.
>> So, yeah, there's not necessarily for us a reason
to we'll keep. We have a lot of other
projects going on that we can't really sit there and tweak the
benchmarking. Yeah, benchmarking for us isn't
as important at the moment now as you scale. You wanna keep
that in mind? But for us, it hasn't really been a
concern, but yeah,
let's get Let's keep moving. We've got the next one,
which is Haskell's great for domain modeling and preventing
errors in domain logic. Right? So this is
about kind of being able to create data
types that clearly express what you're trying
to do give you
records that make sense that keep everybody
you know, keep everything in order, allows you to give data
types to these specific fields on the record,
and you can really crack through and know,
Okay, this is this is what I'm dealing with every step of the
way.
>> Mhm. And for me, once I
had Haskell's data types, like
as a tool in my tool belt. I
started to wonder how I ever did anything before, because
so often what I want is a
record of data. So, like a
you know, person with a bunch of fields on it, and
each of those has their own type. And then in
addition to that, I want something that lets me select between
different things. So, like usually, this would be an
enum and other languages and enums can't have
data associated. But in Haskell, you can
have whatever arbitrary data on there you want. So you can
say, like your two tools here
are I have one thing with a bunch of named fields on it,
or I have a choice between all these other things.
And with those two, you can represent
basically everything. And it feels great to do
it.
>> Yeah, yeah, ADTs where life changer, for
sure. I mean, I've even today
I didn't do it in Haskell, but I've been doing a lot in Elm.
So far as pattern matching is concerned. And I think that was, you know,
just incredible that the compiler can catch that
as long as you have the warnings enabled. That's, you know, the Catch
22 there. But you know, you have warn all or warn error you're
gonna be able to see if you add
something to else to the ADT
You're gonna get a compiler and says,
Hey, check this out. You're missing
non exhaustive pattern matching here,
and I think that
>> A good example of this from the blog post is like if
you have something that's modeling and invoice
in a more, like in javascript, you might
have a field on the invoice that says, Is it
paid or not? And that thing would be a Boolean, and it's true or false.
And then, as your system grows, you like crap we need to
represent, Uh, this thing can be canceled
in addition to either being not paid yet or paid.
Um, and so you would either
add another field that says canceled. And then you have to worry about Well, what
if it's paid, but but also
canceled? Does that even make sense? Um, and in
Haskell instead, you can have an ADT that says your
status is either unpaid, paid
or canceled. And when you go and add that canceled one
later, the compiler will tell you these are the places
where you need to go update your code. So this ties back with that,
you know, powerful. Uh, refactoring and
rapid development we were talking about earlier. You just
add the constructor and have the compiler tell
you not literally everywhere, but almost everywhere
you're going to go and need to update.
>> Yeah, No, I think I think it's great. Um
I think it's been
game changer for me, especially coming from
JavaScript previously where I had to deal with those
kind of situations and I couldn't clearly say, Hey, I
have yeah, you can use a case statement, but it's not
really the same. Yeah, you have your
matching on a string or number like that's just not how
you wanna match on. So, like, being able to
have these data types that have this pattern matching is
great. Yeah. Um, the
next thing we're gonna get into is,
you know, as far as Haskell compares to other
languages maybe a little, you know, less. But
still, just as powerful, um is the
amount off libraries high quality
libraries that are available where you can look
at other languages, like JavaScript that has npm
with million's of libraries.
And you can look at PHP that has
all kinds and, you know, like you can look at any language and
there's the ba-jillions. Haskell maybe
has a smaller set of that, but everything was high
quality. You know what? You what you're getting with?
Like there's documentation. There's places to search through it,
comprehend what's going on, you know?
Yes. You're not going to get ah, third party service
to, you know, have some SDK for Haskell.
That's most likely not gonna happen, but
doesn't mean you can't write it and put it out there for the world.
You know, it's a great, great place
too. Got some good stuff.
>> Yeah, And I again was surprised, though
coming from Ruby, which has many times
more packages available than Haskell
for pretty much everything we do at work, there is a package already
available. And like you mentioned for third party services, there may
not be one. But it turns out that having
a having the ability to define those
custom types that we just talked about makes it really easy to
write your own because you say Okay, this is the data model that I'm gonna
be sending to them. And this is what I expect back. And then you
just plug in an HTTP Library typically in between those
and you're off to the races.
>> Mhm. Yeah, like for us.
You know, we use Recurly, and we've kind of
created our own. Recurly library.
I don't know if we've published it anywhere at the moment, but, you know, we're
>> not yet.
>> We have some set of, you know,
we know the specifications. We've seen their documentation and we wrote
out, you know, specs that can be
translated. You know, the data types were
all written and all that kind of stuff and It's just kind of there. Um,
you know, we don't really have a ton of time to maintain an open
source library like that, but, you know, it's possible.
>> Yeah. Um and so, yeah, moving on to the
next one? Uh, Haskell makes it easy to
write concurrent programs. Um,
basically, Haskell's runtime
lets you have multiple green threads going at the same
time. So unlike JavaScript, where
everything is single threaded with Haskell, you can have multiple
threads. And this makes doing anything with asynchronous
stuff way nicer.
>> Oh, yeah, Yeah.
Personally, like in my professional experience, have had too
much issue with async and not async.
Um, but I know you you have with your
Ruby situation.
>> So as I keep mentioning, I used to work a lot with Ruby,
and, um, the only option
there if you wanted to do something asynchronously
was to throw it on a job queue. Because otherwise you
would hold up the thread that was serving
the request, and you wouldn't be able to serve the next request.
So if you wanted to, like, send
an email to somebody or when somebody logs in, you want to
go like update something in your database, but it's not
critical that it gets done before they finish logging in. So
you can you want to do it in the background, you would have to make a job
for that. Whereas in Haskell, you could just say
async. Whatever. And it'll go do it
>> nice. Yeah, I think that's great.
So go concurrent
programs. Ah,
but let's keep moving. We've got I've got
a my dog here who's keeps butting into the
table. So pardon me if you keep hearing
random crashes.
Uh, that would be a little
puppy being a little puppy. Um, anyways,
keep moving. We've got Haskell, enables
domain specific languages with foster expressiveness
and reduce boilerplate.
Yeah, sure.
>> So I think these days the
canonical example of a domain specific
language. Well, maybe maybe not.
SQL is one. So if you wanna
interact with a relational database, more likely than not, you're gonna be
writing SQL and Haskell makes it really easy to
use languages like SQL
inside of a Haskell program so that you can, um
write Your query using language. Is that you know, already
mhm and usually the way this is done
is with Template Haskell and one of the examples that he
calls out to his persistent And this is used to,
like, define your data models and how they get
stored to the database and how you query them and it comes
with a whole slew of benefits.
But for me, I am not the world's
biggest fan of DSLs I like him. Okay, But
I am. I like
embedded domain specific language is a little bit more
and an eDSL is something that
uses the
syntax of the like, quote unquote host language.
So instead of like having embedded
SQL string in your code, you
would write like a Haskell expression that then gets turned into
SQL. So for other languages, usually this
is a like ORM an object
relational manager, library, whatever it is
where you like, you know, do user dot
find, you know, some ID whatever. And it just
creates the SQL for you behind
>> the scenes. Yeah, and I
mean, I don't have a ton of experience with
DSLs I'm sure you know, with
time I will. But I'm definitely looking to kind of
understand, like you know the example he gives here
persistent, like, we're using it more and more, you know,
for SQL and for Mongo. So understanding a little
bit more about how those work, Um, it's
gonna be really beneficial.
Um, but yeah, I think that's
awesome. I think the last one is my favorite.
Personally, you know, I feel like I've probably said these
are my favorite like all of them. But this one's my favorite
because it's true. And, you know, Haskell
Weekly gets a shout out, but
>> you said it's true. The topic here is that it has a
large community filled with smart and friendly people. And
yeah, I I agree with this one. Um, you know,
as part of running Haskell weekly, I keep an
eye on lots of different parts of the community, and,
uh, you know, by and large, it's
really smart and friendly. If you have a question, people are
very happy to help you with it and show you
how to do things the right way.
>> Yeah, think that's awesome. You get a little
puppy love over here, too runs
around, and it's getting really feisty
right now. Um,
>> but yeah, it's ah that about wraps up the post.
And like we said at the top, you know, we, I
guess, feel basically the same as these
guys at Foxhound Systems that, um, Haskell
has enabled us to write very,
um, robust, reliable software and
maintain it over time without, you know,
ripping our hair out, trying to debug null
pointer, nil, null pointer exceptions. And that kind of stuff.
Um and yeah, like the last one
mentioned, the community is super important, and we're happy to be a
part of that. Uh, if you want to, you
know, figure out what's going on in the community. Please go check
out the Haskell Weekly newsletter. You can read more at
haskellweekly.news You can catch us on
Twitter on reddit GitHub all over the place.
Um, yeah,
>> yeah, yeah. In Haskell weekly is brought to you by
our employers ITProTV, which is the
e-learning platform for IT professionals.
We just wanted to Thank you all for
listening on and ITProTV would love to extend
a promo code to you guys. That is
HaskellWeekly30 for 30% off the
lifetime of your membership. So please. Your interested
go check out itpro.tv Uh,
get your access. You can sign up for a free
account if you want. Um, yeah, yeah. Any interest
in IT? Please, Please, please check it out
>> for sure. Well thanks so much for
listening. See you next time.
>> Peace.